ADR 1: Component architecture for sidebar application
=====================================================

Context
-------

Historically front-end web frameworks, including Angular 1.x, used a variety of
MVC-based patterns for structuring the user interface part of an application
, which of course is much of the code for a web app.

More recently (especially since React in 2013), web frameworks have generally
moved to a simpler model where an application is structured as a tree of
components with several key properties:

 * Each component's internals are hidden from other components.
 * Data is explicitly passed from one component to another and in one direction.
 * Components have an explicitly declared API.
 * Communication from child to parent happens via callback inputs.
 * Components have a standard set of lifecycle hooks for creation, input changes
   and destruction.

A further pattern that emerged on top of this was to split components into those
which purely reflect their inputs ("presentational" components) and those which
are connected to services and state in the application ("container" or
"connected" components).

This pattern made it easier to reason about, re-use and change pieces of the
application in isolation, as well as enabling important optimizations and
simpler framework implementations.

In Angular JS prior to v1.5, this pattern could be achieved by using a
combination of features (element directives, isolate scope, bind-to-controller,
controllerAs) and all of our new UI components written during 2016 followed this
pattern. However, it isn't that obvious until you know the codebase well that
this is the way the UI is structured.

Angular JS 1.5x introduced [explicit
support](https://docs.angularjs.org/guide/component) for this architecture via
`.component()`.

Decision
--------

We will convert all element directives in `src/sidebar/directive` to components
and move them to `src/sidebar/components`. This change will be simple in most
cases and will require some moderate refactoring for others.

The top-level of the UI which consists of a mix of router, controller
and templates unlike the rest of the UI will also be converted to this pattern.

Status
------

In discussion

Consequences
------------

In the short term, this change should improve the consistency of how UI
components are defined and how they communicate with one another. It should also
make it easier to understand and refactor parts of the client in isolation. It
is hoped this will also make it easier for newcomers to understand how the UI is
structured and reduce the number of concepts that they need to grok.

In the medium term, this brings the architecture of the client more into
alignment with how it would be structured in other frameworks and gives us the
opportunity to incrementally migrate to a more actively developed (and
potentially smaller, faster, simpler) library for building our UI in future.

Presentational components can be potentially be extracted into their own
packages for re-use in other parts of Hypothesis, though this is not an active
priority.
